Many of us can barely remember a time
when we didn't have cell phones.
In fact, they've become such an integral
and common part of our lives
that we've ceased to question the technology anymore.
One man who has not stopped questioning
is Dr. Nick Begich.
best known for his work in the area of HAARP,
Dr. Begich has turned his attention
to 21st century technologies
and the truth behind their interface
with the human body and brain.
This is an interview not to be missed
and one that you'll likely want to share
with your family and friends.
We're talking about 21st century technologies
and one of the really interesting, I think fascinating,
technologies that affect most of us now
is cell phone technology
and it's my understanding that some of this
may actually be affecting us in a negative way.
Yeah and that's right.
You know, cell phones have been one of the few devices
that we've had in large circulation
where we've actually taken something
that produces a radio frequency signal
and stuck it right next to the head.
And you know, this created quite a bit of controversy.
Many will remember years ago
there was an incident in Florida
where somebody had asserted they had a brain tumor formed
from cell phone use and there was a lawsuit filed.
The Congress got involved and this became
quite the controversy
and what happened in those congressional hearings
eventually the industry agreed to do a $25 million study
where they would look at cell phones
and the literature surrounding cell phones
and what had already been done in the research
and try and figure out whether indeed there was
a biological effect, an effect on our health or on our minds
and so what happened is
they hired a guy named Dr. George Carlo
and Dr. Carlo put together a team of experts.
The unusual thing was instead of reporting to
say an engineering group or something like this
and with the cell phone industry, his primary contact
was our chief lobbyist in Washington, D.C.
After five years, he completed his work,
he produced a study.
The industry went forward with it and said
everything is wonderful and everything is safe
and George Carlo was so incensed because he felt
that there were significant problems with cell phones
and he published a book called
"Cell Phones: The Invisible Hazards."
And what he showed in his theoretical model was that
the heating that, the heat transfer from the phone
into the head, actually caused a breakdown
in the blood brain barrier,
the things that separate toxins from getting into the brain
and he felt that the most likely mechanism for tumor
formation was in fact the slowing of the repair of DNA,
which normally would take place,
but by slowing it down,
that's where the tumor formation would occur
and that's what he felt the mechanism was.
But you're saying that the heat transfer
was creating a slowing down of the normal DNA repair?
That's correct.
And this slowing down is sort of the root of the problem
in that particular incident.
Now, what he looked at
was he looked at children say at five years old
and at five years old, 400% more energy
actually transfers through the phone, through the skull
because of skull thickness is much smaller
in a five year old than in an adult.
A 10 year old, 200% more energy transfers
and then of course the adult transfer.
Now, in Great Britain they take this into consideration.
The beginning of the school year
there are warnings that go out
that tell parents if you're kids are under 16,
you know, dissuade their use from cell phones
because they utilize in Europe what's called
the precautionary principle,
which says that once you have information
that says there may be a problem,
you don't wait till there's absolute proof.
You begin to give that information to the public
so that they can utilize that information
in making decisions.
Now, this applies to areas in health
and areas within the environment
and this principle's been applied in Europe about 30 years
and never once have they been wrong,
not waiting for this final proof of the studies
like we do in the United States.
Now, there's been several other studies
beyond George Carlo's.
There was one study that we actually cite
in some of our work
that involved 15,000 individuals in Scandinavia.
Now, Scandinavia, Finland in particular,
Nokia was sort of the beginning of this whole industry
and so the density of the population
that use cell phones is quite high
and there's some history, there's some time
that we can actually take a look over a period of time.
Now what that study said is essentially an hour of use,
which is per day, which is pretty standard,
you know, when you think about how people
use these things all over the world now,
was sufficient to create a number of effects.
One of those effects was heating behind the ears,
which most people go, "Yeah I feel that."
The other was interference with sleep rhythms,
interference with short-term memory,
interference with sex drive.
All these things were being reported,
not just the most severe situations of tumor formation,
but these other types of incidences.
Fatigue was often reported
associated with excessive cell phone use.
The problem with the device,
and you can go back to the work
of Professor Lin at the University of Washington
back in the '60s was doing work for the Navy
where he was analyzing various energy forms
in the microwave range,
in the range of cell phones,
precisely in the range of cell phones,
and looking at physiological effects
and what he found in five out of six studies
there was actually a mutation
in the formation of chick embryos
because of changes to DNA structures.
So when cell phones came out
and Dr. Carlo's reports came out
and then the industry said everything is safe,
this gentleman came forward and said wait a minute,
you know, we did these studies
before cell phones ever existed
and we know that energy densities
that are equal to what cell phones produce
in those frequency ranges
are in fact hazardous to person's long-term health.
And so this individual was just one.
The other one that came forward was Ross Adey
and Ross Adey, which is A-D-E-Y.
If you do a search on the Internet,
he is one of the most published scientists in the world.
He had hundreds of peer-reviewed papers.
He was used extensively by the military for looking at
all kinds of electromagnetic field effects on human beings.
Even Motorola hired him once to look at cell phones.
And what he had found is one particular range
that cell phones operated within
would actually create a beneficial health effect,
but the fact that it created any effect
then moved this into the realm of the FDA.
So the funding was pulled, his project was canceled.
Ross Adey also, prior to his death, came forward
and you'll see it on the Internet with a good search.
And he was incensed by the fact that the industry
was dampening what the public was really entitled to know,
that there were things that could be done.
Now since Carlo's work came out,
there have been over a dozen patents
filed by the industry to make cell phones safer.
And we're not just talking cellular phones,
the home portable phones actually can be potentially
more dangerous because the energy densities
tend to be a little more intense
because the batteries can be recharged regularly.
You're not worried about conserving that battery juice
or conserving that energy.
At the same time, the circuitry is more poorly designed
so you have more leakage from those circuits,
more radiation actually coming off of the phones.
The ideal cell phones,
'cause they're not going away.
I mean, obviously we're going to have them for forever.
The thing that can change
is the way in which they're designed
and this is again something that could be
easily integrated into cell phone design.
If you take the speakerphones, for instance,
that you hold away from your head.
That distance is sufficient, for most theoretical models,
to make them quite safe and reasonable.
You know, and of course your conversation's
no longer private,
but is it anyway when you're on a cell phone? (laughs)
Well now what about the little earbuds
and ear pieces?
Well some of the ear pieces are quite good.
If the insulators are well designed and well made, it's fine
but often you find them very thinly insulated
and they actually shunt energy into the inner ear
and so you feel even more heating
concentrated sort of in the ear.
In that case, there's some simple things
that a person could do.
One of those is taking a small piece of magnetic metal,
like bailing wire, you know,
that you can pick it up with a magnet.
And if you make a coil around that lead wire
that's coming into the ear,
so you have the wire coming in,
you make a coil around this part,
what happens is as the energy moves up,
it hits that coil and it dissipates,
doesn't make it in the inner ear.
You know, it's similar to what those small devices now
with electronic equipment that they clip on
so you don't get the disturbance.
It's essentially taking that energy and dissipating it
in a way that it doesn't interfere
and the same can be done cheaply and simply.
I mean, anyone can do that with the earbuds.
The other thing to consider is where you place the phone.
I mean, most people, what do they do?
They put the phone on their waist.
Well there you have a lot of soft tissue.
So the heat energy actually penetrates deeper.
So you can affect the internal organs in a way
that might not be beneficial at all.
The ideal is with that type of ear piece
to set the phone next to you.
If you don't have that kind of ear piece,
just the manner in which you hold the phone.
Get your index finger between you and that phone.
Get a little bit of distance
'cause just an inch of distance, you can still hear fine,
will cause that energy concentration or energy density
to be reduced by probably two or three times.
Just getting it away from the ear
and not pressing it up against the head
where that energy transfer happens fairly efficiently.
So simple things can be done.
But there are, I've seen other small devices.
Just little buttons, pads,
little bits of film that are sticky
that they say can help if you stick it on the inside,
inside the battery or on top where the antennae is.
How effective are those kinds
of ameliorating technologies?
Now there's, we researched this
because we were very interested,
and you know, when we talk about technology
we also like to talk about what are the solutions
and what's out there and the ones I've already given
are the ones that cost nobody anything
and that's, of course, the ideal.
The other thing that you're speaking about
is these small RF absorbers
or some kind of ceramic materials.
Now, we went and looked at
everything out there on the market.
About the same time, the Federal Trade Commission
in the United States was doing the same thing
and they jerked seven devices off the market
for making false claims
because they had no science behind them whatsoever.
When we went out and looked,
we found one device with a US patent
and that particular device we've carried for years
because it has the science behind it
and it was developed by one of the largest
electronics companies in Korea
that was looking for a ceramic material
and something to buffer microcircuits from RF,
from radio frequency interference,
because that's a big problem with fine circuit design.
So you need certain kinds of insulators
or things to protect those circuits.
And as a side, a spin-off, for them
they developed a similar technology
that could be used on cell phones
and they applied for the US patent and they received it.
But it only reduces the energy by about 60%
in the cell phones tested,
which is, you know, it's a nice step in the right direction,
but at the same time there are claims being made
by others that you can knock out 100% of the energy.
If you knock out 100% of the energy,
then the phone isn't on (laughs)
and there's no battery in it.
You know, because you can't do that.
And the fact is, a certain amount of energy
has to flow through the circuit.
A certain amount of that energy is going to leak
from that circuit.
The ideal would be to see the industry
put the requisite energy and effort
into building better ceramic materials,
but this of course drives the cost of the hardware up,
which creates the problem.
The other thing is the way the phones are rated.
You know, between one model within the same brand name
and another model within the same brand name
we have seen as much as a 600% difference
from one phone to the other
in terms of how much energy is transferred.
You know, and we've put on our website,
which is probably gonna be linked to this,
the idea that there's 10 that are the worst
and 10 that are the best
and then there's a website that's indicated
where you can go and look at all the phones
that have been made to see how they rate.
The rating system should be promoted.
They should discuss that rating system
and those ratings right now are on the inside of the package
where you can't see them when you buy the phone
and they should be on the outside
so people can make informed decisions
and get the best phone possible.
In the interim, speaker phones are the best.
Hold them away from your head.
Secondly, until all of the evidence is in,
children should not be using cell phones at all.
And they're popularized in every sitcom
where little teeny boppers have their cell phones on
from age eight.
Right, you know, and kids are out there.
They're using them all the time.
You know, it is all the promotion in the United States
is oriented about family use, kids use.
Yet when you look at the literature,
we did an article on this.
We published it some time ago on the web.
It's on our website, there's 89 sourced documents cited.
All of them are mainstream or academic studies,
things that people can sink their teeth into.
But we're talking about a multibillion dollar industry,
you know, an industry that is not going to go away
and from my perspective over time what we're going to see
is CEOs and very active people, leaders,
the kind of people that use these phones
for hours and hours a day, attorneys.
I mean, Johnny Cochran just died of a brain tumor.
You know, start looking at how many people
are dying of brain tumors today versus 20 years ago
and I think you're gonna see a trend line
that eventually is gonna get disclosed to the public
as another mystery illness.
The only difference is the correlations
between what side of the head you're holding your phones
would indicate a great deal
and I think this is something that needs
not more study, but immediate discussion of,
the studies can continue, but people need to know
so we can make the wise decisions that we need to make.
As busy as I am, I don't have a cell phone.
And I mean, I value my private time.
The drive time is private time for me.
But there are good reasons to not have them.
For me, the health is the least of those reasons.
From my perspective, it's the privacy question.
Which is what I was going to ask you
right off of that as a matter of fact and I bet your kids
don't carry any cell phones on them either. (laughs)
You know, the privacy issue's a big deal.
This is a big deal.
Yeah, a lot of people are concerned
with the fact that they're everyday citizens
and not particularly concerned that they're doing anything
that's questionable, but nonetheless,
that there's a tracking possibility
for where you are every moment
when you have your cell phone on you.
Absolutely, these phones are now built with GPS system,
geographic positioning systems,
so you can be located easily in case of an emergency,
as the storyline goes,
but the reality is every time you make the call,
every time that you're on the line,
when you register the call it's who called,
where you called, and where you were when you called.
So in case of criminal investigations,
in Switzerland and other places,
they have used this data and been able to go backwards
and then trace all of your movements.
And you may not feel like, you know as they say,
well if you don't have anything to hide,
what are you worried about?
The worry is who's deciding.
You know, this is the same question that was raised
when Adolf Hitler marched through Germany and Europe
was if you don't have anything to hide.
The fact of the matter is those in charge have no right
to penetrate our personal privacy in that way.
I mean, why should our movements be tracked?
Why should that data be collected?
And the reason it is
is because it can be, it's cheap,
data storage is cheaper and cheaper and cheaper
so longer and longer amounts of communication
records can be kept
and ultimately this integrates into what turns into
a much more directive and controlled society,
which is, you know, when you start jumping into these issues
you start looking at how does technology integrate,
what do those integrations do,
and how does that change how we're perceived
and what's happened,
cell phones as a small little niche in this,
we become increasingly transparent
as human beings in technological societies.
Well at the same time, our governments
and those organizations that regulate us
become more and more opaque.
Just the opposite of what ought to be occurring.
And people have read about cases
where it's been admitted into evidence
shopping records, for example,
through our convenience cards
because those records are also made available
in case of say a criminal investigation.
So and this we've known about for awhile.
We know about the cell phones.
What other kind of technologies are being employed
that are, in essence, invading our rights to privacy
and what's coming down the pike?
Well this is, you know to me, these are the big issues.
I mean, as we start to look at personal privacy
and technology, you can think about transaction tracking
like what we're talking about here.
You know, your little discount card,
all your credit cards, your medical records,
your utility bills, your passport information,
your driver's license, your real estate transaction.
I mean, think of all of the things that we do as individuals
that ultimately makes it into somebody's database.
What these databases turn into is giant data banks.
You know, one of the big ones that just got nailed
for losing a bunch of records, ClearPoint,
you know, and this is because they maintain
billions and billions of records on individuals
so that you can use it for what's called soft intelligence
or what the Europeans now call,
in the European Parliament, dataveillance
where they review the data as a method of surveillance
to determine a whole lot about individuals.
You know, you just talk about racial profiling.
This is, you know, a leapfrog way above that.
This is looking at all transactions
and drawing assessments from them.
And that same company actually signed contracts
in the late '90s with the Department of Justice
to be available as a source material
for developing that kind of soft intelligence
for criminal investigation and those kinds of uses.
Is this information used for
anything beyond gathering criminal intelligence?
Well you know, under the Patriot Act and the kind of
legislations that have been passed since 9/11,
you know, we took this issue on pre 9/11
and we published a book about this,
"The Earth Rising: The Revolution,"
to talk about all these kinds of issues
and sort of their impact
and predicting, you know, what will happen if.
When 9/11 happened, everything of course changed
and the what-ifs became the here and now.
And so when you talk about these kind of technologies
there tends to be more willingness to accept
these kinds of invasive technolgies
in terms of our personal privacy
in exchange for what we think is safety and security.
So you see large changes happening
in the area of biometrics, you know,
which used to be just we thought of IDs as thumbprints.
Now, biometrics extends to anything unique
to your own biology.
For instance, your iris is unique as a thumbprint
so an iris scan can give you the same kind of information,
positive ID is what it boils down to.
Heat emanations from the face
are as unique as your thumbprint.
The idea of a voice print, five to 20 seconds of your voice
is as unique as your thumbprint.
Where is this information being harvested?
Well I think, you know, when you look at
first of all the systems.
This is a big, how do you collect all this data?
You know, when you go back, you gotta go back a little bit
and we gotta talk about a project that began
just after World War II and it was the Echelon program,
which involved five countries.
It was the United States, Canada, Great Britain,
Australia, New Zealand,
and what we did is we agreed after World War II
to exchange what was called then signal intelligence,
you know, radio broadcast.
Telephone was kinda new,
it wasn't in every house in those days.
But to use each other to survey each other's populations
so we wouldn't violate our own domestic laws,
or in the United States, our Constitution,
'cause you just couldn't go out and on a wholesale basis
survey everybody, but the Canadians could do it
and provide the data to our security agencies,
which is exactly what has transpired.
There's an article, November 2003,
in all places, National Geographic that lays this out.
We laid it out three years before in our earlier work,
but it's nice to see it in a mainstream publication.
And they talk about Echelon,
they talk about the idea of analyzing that data
and here's been the problem.
For the NSA, which does it on the United States' side,
it's been how do you get all the electronic communications?
You know, we're talking about telephones,
faxes, Internet,
I mean just think of all the ways that people communicate.
How do you pick out all those billions
of individual communications and sort it?
Well supercomputers do the first job
and they do it with the establishment first
of what are called dictionaries.
Now, dictionaries as you and I think about them
are little books with words in them.
The way these agencies think about them
is it's that plus word phrases,
voice information, voice print information.
You know when Osama bin Laden goes on the phone
and they say, or does a press conference
that they try and interpret,
they say it takes weeks to figure out.
It doesn't, it takes seconds.
They know immediately who it is.
That's why he got rid of all forms
of electronic communication before he hit the trail
and that's why we can't find him.
There's no electronic signature to go after
because he's not on the grid so to speak.
By the same token, when you look at
sort of the invasiveness of all this and where it heads,
there was a paper put together, it was called
"The Revolution in Military Affairs
"and Conflict Short of War" and it was 1989 or '90
by the U.S. Army War College
and it was, you know, that's a really good institution
in terms of laying doctrine out for military training
and leaders that are coming.
And they looked at all of these technologies
and much, much more as a change that was so profound
in terms of what was happening.
They equated the changes in military technologies
from the days of gunpowder being introduced
into Europe in the Middle Ages
or that atomic weapons of the last century,
those are the kind of changes that they say are coming
based on electromagnetic systems
for surveillance and offensive weaponry.
So when you talk about sort of where does it go,
what they said in this
was there were several things that we could do
that would increase our capacity as a country militarily,
but these things would run counter to American values.
One of the examples that was given within this paper
was microchip technology
that could be embedded in service personnel
that would be used in '89 and '90 for just GPS,
for locating them in the battlefield.
And you know, if you were going in the battlefield
you might want that.
I mean, if you were going in and you got captured
or got hurt and you wanted to be extracted
and found rapidly, you know, this would be ideal.
So in that sense, if you had a vote on it,
that would be great, but as we know in the military
you don't get votes, you get orders
so everybody does what they're told.
The problem is they didn't stop there.
They suggested that this be installed
in every business traveler because it's a volatile world,
but don't worry, they won't turn them on
unless there's a problem is what they said.
The problem with all of that is it really runs counter
to how Americans and most free peoples feel
about their government's ability to monitor activity,
although already in the Attorney General's office
in Mexico City, they have installed 200 people
with microcircuits to track their movements.
This was major media in the last year, has come out,
and they'd like to have their entire bureaucracy chipped
for tracking purposes.
The places it also comes up is with elders
who are losing mental faculties for keeping track of them,
children because of fear of kidnapping,
prisoners on parole instead of ankle bracelets,
sex offenders for life so you can track
where they're at, where they've been all their lives.
And many people would go, "You know,
"those would be alright applications," at least today.
Pre 9/11, nobody believed that.
Right, that's true.
And so now the government can have the media
throw up an orange alert
and everybody says, "I'll do it, I'll do it."
Is that what's going on?
That's exactly what's going on
and here's what this paper said.
This paper projected that the only way
that these technologies and many others that they referenced
could be advanced, would be a change in American values.
And they believe that the only way those values would change
is in an environment of fear stimulated by two things:
international terrorism
and in international drug trafficking.
When was this written?
'89.
'89 or '90.
But in any case, you can see it referenced in our work
and the point of the matter is
look at what's happened since 9/11.
Look at the PSAs, the public service announcements,
that tie drug trafficking and terrorism together,
you know, that start to amplify that kind of fear.
One of the things in that paper that it said
that was highly disturbing was the idea that
we could use this intelligence
and maybe combine it with other technologies
and knock an aircraft out of the sky
that was carrying suspected terrorists, for example.
So we'd knock it out of the sky, it'd crash,
and when you looked at all of it
it would look like pilot error.
And the argument was made that maybe
the Constitution stopped at the doorstep
of the United States and didn't carry beyond our boundaries.
Now, there's nobody that I have met
along the road of life that believes
that our military drops the Constitution at the door.
Quite the contrary, it goes with them.
Those are the values that we expect them
to carry, not forget.
Now, this was actually, it actually happened,
that the NSA provided the Peruvian Air Force,
less than a year ago, information and intelligence
on a drug trafficking air craft.
The Peruvian Air Force went up, shot the air craft down
and it contained a couple of missionaries,
not drug traffickers at all.
So the problem they predicted could happen,
which is downing the wrong air craft,
did happen and there was no deniability.
The United States was culpable,
but nobody's been held responsible.
So we are already engaged in the violation
of our own sense of right and wrong because
all these things violate basic constitutional previsions
like a presumption of innocence,
a jury, a judge, and an outcome.
Well, none of it sounds to bode well right now.
From a consumer, an advocate, point of view
what can the average person do
in terms of protecting themselves in any way?
Other than not having a cell phone,
but it sounds like that's really just
a drop in the large bucket
where these invasions of our personal rights
seem to be taking place.
Absolutely, you know, the key elements are several.
Firstly, you know, the idea of educating the public
on what these technologies do.
Technology generally doubles about every 10 months,
from the invention of the wheel to where we are today.
So it becomes extremely important
that technological issues get some public debate.
One of the roles that we played in the last 11 years
is to try and force that debate, to bring information out,
working with over 200 radio and TV producers
around the world,
we continue to take the information forward,
build our databases and get the information out,
hoping that we could see the political changes
that are necessary to properly regulate
and protect the values that Americans
and other free peoples around the world hold in common.
And that ultimately is the first step
in the right direction.
It has to be education followed by political action
that restrains and constrains industry
from abusing power that technology today offers.
And you know, in all of our work what we have found
is the abuses of technology, the abuses of power,
are not based on some sinister viewpoint
held by a few, but based on the concepts
that their ideas are important,
they want to further their ideas
and they're using technology to do it.
And sometimes people get a little zealous (laughs)
and I think whether you're from the left or the right,
the temptation.
Zbigniew Brzezinski said it in "Between Two Ages,"
a book he wrote in the early '70s,
before he was National Security Advisor
to Jimmy Carter, that as these technologies evolved
that the left or the right would be tempted to use them
to further their political ends
and I think that's what we're seeing
is these technologies are being used
not just for political purposes, but for many purposes
under the illusion of creating safety and security,
but what are we creating that safety and security for
if it's not to maintain those basic values
that have been the American character,
that have been who we are as human beings?
And that's what's missing in the equation.
For more information on this subject,
check out Dr. Begich's website
and for those of you who are curious
about the HAARP project,
which Dr. Begich has spent so many years investigating,
you'll also find the interview with Jerry E. Smith
quite an eye opener.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(mellow jazz music)